Redefine (co)limits in terms of kan extensions (#186)
plt-amy/1lab: src/Cat/Diagram/Limit/Base.lagda.md

# Idea

**Note**: This page describes the general definition of limits, and
assumes some familiarity with some concrete examples, in particular
[terminal objects], [products], [equalisers], and [pullbacks]. It might
be a good idea to check out those pages before continuing!

[terminal objects]: Cat.Diagram.Terminal.html
[products]: Cat.Diagram.Product.html
[equalisers]: Cat.Diagram.Equaliser.html
[pullbacks]: Cat.Diagram.Pullback.html

To motivate limits, note how all the above examples have roughly the
same structure. They all consist of some object, a bunch of maps out

> of said object, some commuting conditions, and a universal property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of said object, some commutativity conditions, and a universal property
```

that states that we can construct unique maps into the object under
certain conditions.

Our first step towards making this vague intuition precise is to construct
a mathematical widget that picks out a collection of objects, arrows,

> and commutation conditions in a category. This is required to describe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and commutativity conditions in a category. This is required to describe
```

We can perform the same trick with non-discrete categories; for instance,
a functor out of the [parallel arrows category] selects a pair of
parallel arrows in $\cC$, a functor out of the [isomorphism category]
selects an isomorphism in $\cC$, and so on. We call such functors
**diagrams** to suggest that we should think of them as picking out some
shape in $\cC$.

[parallel arrows category]: Cat.Instances.Shape.Parallel.html
[isomorphism category]: Cat.Instances.Shape.Isomorphism.html

We can use this newfound insight to describe the shape that each of our
examples is defined over. Products are defined over a diagram that
consists of a pair of objects; these diagrams correspond to functors
out of the category with 2 objects and only identity morphisms.
Equalisers are defined over a diagram that consists of a pair of parallel
morphisms; such diagrams are given by functors out of the aforementioned
parallel arrows category. Pullbacks defined over a diagram of the shape,
$\bullet \to \bullet \leftarrow \bullet$; again, these diagrams are
given by functors out of the category with that exact shape. Terminal
objects may seem to break this trend, but we can think of them as

> being defined over the empty diagram, which is given by functors out
> of the category with no objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
being defined over the empty diagram, the unique functor from
the category with no objects.
```

using existing objects!

Luckily, we can! If we take a step back, we can notice that we are trying
to construct a map into a functor. What are maps into functors? Natural
transformations! Concretely, let $D : \cJ \to cC$ be some diagram.
We can encode the same data as a cone in a natural transformation
$\eta : !x \circ ! \to D$, where $!x : \top \to \cC$ denotes
the constant functor that maps object to $x$ and every morphism to $id$,
and $! : \cJ \to \top$ denotes the unique functor into the terminal
category. The components of such a natural transformation yield maps from
$x \to D(j)$ for every $j : \cJ$, and naturality ensures that these
maps must commute with the rest of the diagram. We can describe this
situation diagrammatically like so:

~~~{.quiver}
\begin{tikzcd}
  && \top \\
  \\
  {\cJ} &&& {} & {\cC}
  \arrow[from=3-1, to=1-3]
  \arrow["{!X}"', from=1-3, to=3-5]
  \arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, from=3-1, to=3-5]
  \arrow["\eta"{description}, shorten <=4pt, shorten >=4pt, Rightarrow, from=1-3, to=0]
\end{tikzcd}
~~~

All that remains is the universal property. If we translate this into
our existing machinery, that means that $!x$ must be the universal

> functor equipped with natural transformation $\eta$; that is, for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functor equipped with a natural transformation $\eta$; that is, for
```

Write out eta's type, too?

any other $K : \top \to \cC$ equipped with $\tau : K \circ \to D$, we

> have a unique natural transformation $\sigma : K \to !x$ that factorises

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have a unique natural transformation $\sigma : K \to !x$ that factors
```

> $\tau$. This is a bit of a mouthful, so lets look at a diagram instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\tau$. This is a bit of a mouthful, so let's look at a diagram instead.
```

~~~{.quiver}
\begin{tikzcd}
  && \top \\
  \\
  {\cJ} &&& {} & {\cC}
  \arrow[from=3-1, to=1-3]
  \arrow[""{name=0, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "{!x}"', from=1-3, to=3-5]
  \arrow[""{name=1, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, from=3-1, to=3-5]
  \arrow[""{name=2, anchor=center, inner sep=0}, "K", curve={height=-18pt}, from=1-3, to=3-5]
  \arrow["\eta"{description}, shorten <=4pt, shorten >=4pt, Rightarrow, from=1-3, to=1]
  \arrow["\sigma", shorten <=3pt, shorten >=3pt, Rightarrow, from=2, to=0]
\end{tikzcd}
~~~

We might be tempted to stop here and call it a day, but we can go one
step further. It turns out that these universal functors have a name:

> they are [right kan extensions]. This allows for an extremely concise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they are [right Kan extensions]. This allows for an extremely concise
```

definition of limits: $x : \cC$ is the limit of a diagram
$D : \cJ \to \cC$ when the constant functor $!x : \top \to \cC$ is

> a right kan extension of $! : \cJ \to \top$ along $D$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a right Kan extension of $! : \cJ \to \top$ along $D$.
```

> [right kan extensions]: Cat.Functor.Kan.Right.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[right Kan extensions]: Cat.Functor.Kan.Right.html
```

    lim .σ {M = M} α .η _ =
      universal (α .η) (λ f → sym (α .is-natural _ _ f) ∙ C.elimr (M .F-id))
    lim .σ {M = M} α .is-natural _ _ _ =
      lim .σ α .η _ C.∘ M .F₁ tt ≡⟨ C.elimr (M .F-id) ⟩
      lim .σ α .η _              ≡˘⟨ C.idl _ ⟩
      C.id C.∘ lim .σ α .η _     ∎
    lim .σ-comm {β = β} = Nat-path λ j →
      factors (β .η) _
    lim .σ-uniq {β = β} {σ′ = σ′} p = Nat-path λ _ →
      sym $ unique (β .η) _ (σ′ .η tt) (λ j → sym (p ηₚ j))
```

<!--
```agda
  fixup-is-limit
    : ∀ {D : Functor J C} {K : Functor ⊤Cat C} {eps : K F∘ !F => D}
    → is-ran !F D K eps
    → is-limit D (Functor.F₀ K tt) (counit→cone D eps)
  fixup-is-limit {D = D} {K} {eps} lim = lim' where
    open Functor
    open is-ran

    lim' : is-limit D (Functor.F₀ K tt) (counit→cone D eps)
    lim' .σ α .η = lim .σ α .η
    lim' .σ {M = M} α .is-natural x y f =
      C.elimr (M .F-id) ∙ sym (C.idl _)
    lim' .σ-comm = Nat-path λ j →
      lim .σ-comm ηₚ j
    lim' .σ-uniq {M = M} {β = β} {σ′ = σ′} p = Nat-path λ _ →
      lim .σ-uniq {β = β} {σ′ = σ″} (Nat-path (p ηₚ_)) ηₚ tt
      where
        σ″ : M => K
        σ″ .η = σ′ .η
        σ″ .is-natural _ _ _ =

>           σ′ .is-natural _ _ _ ∙ ap (C._∘ _) (sym (K .F-id))

Reviewer: This can go, right?

        other-nt .is-natural _ _ _ = C.idr _ ∙ C.introl (Functor.F-id F) -- C.id-comm
```

<!--
```agda
  to-limit
    : ∀ {D : Functor J C} {K : Functor ⊤Cat C} {eps : K F∘ !F => D}
    → is-ran !F D K eps
    → Limit D
  to-limit l .Ran.Ext = _
  to-limit l .Ran.eps = _
  to-limit l .Ran.has-ran = l
```
-->

<!--
```agda
module is-limit
  {J : Precategory o₁ h₁} {C : Precategory o₂ h₂}
  {D : Functor J C} {F : Functor ⊤Cat C} {eps : F F∘ !F => D}
  (t : is-ran !F D F eps)
  where

  open make-is-limit (unmake-limit {F = F} t) public
```
-->

We also provide a similar interface for the bundled form of limits.

```agda
module Limit
  {J : Precategory o₁ h₁} {C : Precategory o₂ h₂} {D : Functor J C} (L : Limit D)
  where
```

<!--
```agda
  private
    import Cat.Reasoning J as J
    import Cat.Reasoning C as C
    module Diagram = Functor D
    open Functor
    open _=>_

  open Ran L public
```
-->

The "apex" object of the limit is the single value in the image of the
extension functor.

```agda
  apex : C.Ob
  apex = Ext.₀ tt
```

Furthermore, we can show that the apex is the limit, in the sense of
`is-limit`{.Agda}, of the diagram. You'd think this is immediate, but

> unfortunately proof assistants: `is-limit`{.Agda} asks for _the_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unfortunately, proof assistants: `is-limit`{.Agda} asks for _the_
```

constant functor functor $\{*\} \to \cC$ with value `apex` to be a Kan
extension, but `Limit`{.Agda}, being an instance of `Ran`{.Agda},
packages an _arbitrary_ functor $\{*\} \to \cC$.

Since Agda does not compare functors for $\eta$-equality, we have to
shuffle our data around manually. Fortunately, this isn't a very long
computation.

```agda
  cone : Const apex => D
  cone .η x = eps .η x
  cone .is-natural x y f = ap (_ C.∘_) (sym $ Ext .F-id) ∙ eps .is-natural x y f

  has-limit : is-limit D apex cone
  has-limit .is-ran.σ α .η = σ α .η
  has-limit .is-ran.σ α .is-natural x y f =
    σ α .is-natural tt tt tt ∙ ap (C._∘ _) (Ext .F-id)
  has-limit .is-ran.σ-comm =
    Nat-path (λ _ → σ-comm ηₚ _)
  has-limit .is-ran.σ-uniq {M = M} {σ′ = σ′} p =
    Nat-path (λ _ → σ-uniq {σ′ = nt} (Nat-path (λ j → p ηₚ j)) ηₚ _) where
      nt : M => Ext
      nt .η = σ′ .η
      nt .is-natural x y f = σ′ .is-natural x y f ∙ ap (C._∘ _) (sym $ Ext .F-id)

  open is-limit has-limit public
```

> # Uniqueness

Reviewer: Similar comments about duplication with Kan extension stuff for colimits also applies here

In more concise terms, we say a functor preserves limits if it takes
limiting cones "upstairs" to limiting cones "downstairs".

```agda
  preserves-limit : Type _
  preserves-limit =
    ∀ {K : Functor ⊤Cat C} {eps : K F∘ !F => Diagram}
    → (lim : is-ran !F Diagram K eps)
    → preserves-ran F lim
```

## Reflection of limits

Using our analogy from before, we say a functor _reflects_ limits
if it takes limiting cones "downstairs" to limiting cones "upstairs".

More concretely, if we have a limit in $\cD$ of $F \circ \rm{Dia}$ with
apex $F(a)$, then $a$ was _already the limit_ of $\rm{Dia}$!

```agda
  reflects-limit : Type _
  reflects-limit =
    ∀ {K : Functor ⊤Cat C} {eps : K F∘ !F => Diagram}
    → (ran : is-ran !F (F F∘ Diagram) (F F∘ K) (nat-assoc-from (F ▸ eps)))
    → reflects-ran F ran
```

> ## Creation of limits

Reviewer: Let's delete this before merging and open an issue to define it again.
